BML Traffic Study: Homework 5

The BML traffic model proved an interesting case study of systems exhibiting phase transitions and self-organization. The simulations were set up in the following way: a matrix of an arbitrary number of rows and columns was initialized with a car density of p, and a two-step series was run an arbitrary number of times, or until the grid did not change from one step to another. The "two step series" mentioned included a step north for the "blue" cars and a step east for the "red" cars in the current state. The "step" function was run 1000 times, or until the matrix did not change, as mentioned. The number 1000 was chosen based on experimental results. Some of the grid-density combinations required high numbers of steps to officially hit a gridlock. This was notably true of the p = 0.3, r = 30, c = 30 set up, in which the average number of steps before gridlock was over 400! I will talk more about these findings later. 

The simulation was really a series of single board simulations. Two such simulations were run, though, in retrospect, only one was necessary. The first one created a list of gridlock percentages (the percentage of time that a certain board configuration led to a gridlock within 1000 trials). Single simulations were run 100 times. If the result of a single simulation was not equal to 1000 (this indicated a gridlock in my implementation), the simulation was added to a running total of simulations that gridlocked. This running total was divided by 100 at the end to obtain a percentage of trials that gridlocked (thus, these percentages filled 101 possible discrete values between 0 and 1). The results of this simulation can be found in the first two charts of bml_figures.pdf, and will be discussed below. The second simulation determined the number of steps until a gridlock occurred, if a gridlock did occur, on average. This was done by checking if a gridlock occurred on a single simulation, and adding it to a running total of gridlocked simulations if this was the case. The number of steps taken (the output of bml.sim) was also added to a running total of steps taken, if this was the case. At the end, the average number of steps taken before a gridlock instance was computed by dividing the latter sum by the former sum. The findings of this simulation are summarized in visual form in plots 3 and 4 of bml_figures.pdf, and these results are analyzed below.

Turning to the findings of the first simulation, we notice something quite intuitive: that the gridlock percentage stays near zero when traffic density is low (p = 0.05 and 0.1 yield exactly 0% gridlock results, for example), and that gridlock percentage increases dramatically as p goes to 1. In fact, these boxplots seem to reveal a sort of logistic model for gridlock percentage as p increases. Note that these boxplots include the results for the densities for all grid sizes (3 x 3, 5 x 3, 3 x 5, 5 x 5, 10 x 10, 30 x 30). The second plot is colored to include this sort of information, and is fairly revealing of the dramatic change that occurs when larger grids are analyzed under this model of simulation. The 30 x 30 grid shows a staggering increase from density 0.25 to 0.40, going from 0% gridlock to 100% gridlock, while still showing a trend towards the logistic distribution. The 3 x 3 grid, quite interestingly doesn't gridlock 100% of the time, even when the density of traffic is 0.95! This seems to show that larger grids gridlock under lower densities and with more consistency that smaller grids. This fact was only confirmed by the outlier for p = 0.35 in the first plot, where the max (30 x 30) was significantly than Q3 in relation to the IQR (actual data value for the 30 x 30 grid in this spot was 0.80, 0.64 greater than Q3!). Finally, flipping the r x c values did not seem to change the gridlocking behavior of the grid substantially, and thus leads us to conclude grid size seems to take precedent over grid shape in these BML simulations.

Moving to the findings of the second simulation, we get findings that are decidedly separate from those of the first. In this simulation, we find that the average number of trials before a gridlock for the simulations with densities between 0.0 and 0.2 are zero --- technically, this should be read as N/A, since there were zero simulations that experienced gridlock for these values (see analysis in the last paragraph). However, we notice something quite interesting between p = 0.25 and 0.35: a huge spike at 0.30, especially for the 30 x 30 board. This indicates that boards enter a sort of "transition phase" between values that show low probability of gridlock and high probability of gridlock, a phase in which the number of trials before a gridlock is maximized. Interestingly, this is especially true for the 30 x 30 case (even in the 10 x 10 case, the spike is less exaggerated, and experiences a bit later  --- at 0.40). This seems to be a trend for board size - the smaller it is, the more gradual the ascent in number of trials until gridlock. Additionally, as board size decreases, the average number of trials before gridlock is maximized at higher densities. Again, flipping the row and column does not change much --- grid size again seems to take precedence over grid shape.

In future studies, I would attempt to utilize regressions on the simulations in these parts, particularly for the first part (I don't know that performing regresson on the second part would yield meaningful results). For the second simulation, I would attempt to pinpoint the density (p) that maximizes the number of steps before gridlock for each size grid. This would provide interesting insight this "transition" phase on different sized states.
